JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
ANTONIO MORA: And I'm Antonio
Mora.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: We only want to admit
those into our
country who will support our
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Closing the door.
President
Trump's latest executive actions
call for
extreme vetting of immigrants.
ANTONIO MORA: Then, a warm
welcome for British
Prime Minister Theresa May, the
first White
House visit from a foreign
leader.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: The invitation
is an indication of the strength
and importance
of this special relationship
that exists between
our two countries.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields
and David Brooks are here to
analyze the first
week of Donald Trump's
presidency.
ANTONIO MORA: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
has had another
full day, with pronouncements
ranging from
refugees to Russia.
He spoke out today at both the
White House
and the Defense Department.
Lisa Desjardins begins our
coverage.
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: It's big stuff.
LISA DESJARDINS: With the first
week of his
presidency over, Mr. Trump acted
on one of
his most polarizing promises.
The Pentagon
was the backdrop, as he signed
an executive
action on curbing the admission
of refugees.
DONALD TRUMP: I'm establishing
new vetting
measures to keep radical Islamic
terrorists
out of the United States of
America. We don't
want them here. We only want to
admit those
into our country who will
support our country
and love, deeply, our people.
LISA DESJARDINS: Candidate Trump
repeatedly
called for extreme vetting of
those from countries
with ties to terrorism. He first
introduced
the idea as a ban on all
Muslims.
DONALD TRUMP: Donald J. Trump is
calling for
a total and complete shutdown of
Muslims entering
the United States until our
country's representatives
can figure out what the hell is
going on.
LISA DESJARDINS: Last year,
former President
Barack Obama welcomed nearly
85,000 refugees,
including more than 12,000
Syrians, and he
increased the limit for this
year to 110,000.
The president also signed
documents today
calling for a dramatic expansion
of the armed
services. And he attended a
ceremonial swearing-in
for Defense Secretary James
Mattis. Earlier,
after meeting with British Prime
Minister
Theresa May, the president said
Mattis, who
believes torture doesn't work,
will have the
last word on using
water-boarding or other
severe interrogation methods.
DONALD TRUMP: I'm going to rely
on him. I
happen to feel that it does
work. I have been
open about that for a long
period of time.
But I am going with our leaders.
LISA DESJARDINS: On relations
with Russia,
Prime Minister May said she
firmly believes
in continued sanctions against
Moscow, for
its actions in Ukraine. But the
president
demurred.
DONALD TRUMP: As far as the
sanctions, very
early to be talking about that.
But we look
to have a great relationship
with all countries,
ideally. But if we can have a
great relationship
with Russia and with China and
with all countries,
I'm all for that.
LISA DESJARDINS: Mr. Trump will
speak with
Russian President Putin by phone
tomorrow.
Today, he held an hour-long
phone call with
Mexican President Enrique Pena
Nieto, who
canceled a visit to Washington
over the president's
executive order to build a
border wall.
President Trump said today's was
a very good
call, but he also renewed his
complaint that
Mexico is taking advantage of
the U.S. on
trade.
DONALD TRUMP: The United States
cannot continue
to lose vast amounts of
business, vast amounts
of companies and millions and
millions of
people losing their jobs. That
won't happen
with me.
LISA DESJARDINS: The Mexican
government issued
its own statement, saying the
two leaders
have agreed not to talk publicly
about the
border wall dispute for now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa joins us
now.
So, Lisa, you reported that the
president
left it open whether he is going
to lift the
sanctions that now exist against
Russia, economic
and other sanctions, but we saw
today Republican
congressional leaders quickly
weighed in.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
Not so open
on the other end of Pennsylvania
Avenue.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell told
Politico tonight that he doesn't
want to lift
these sanctions. In fact, he
went even further
than that, Judy. He said if
there's any regime
in the world that doesn't
deserve sanction
relief, it's Russia.
In addition, House Speaker Paul
Ryan has said
he thought these sanctions were
overdue. It
seems to me, Judy, that as much
as the president
may be leaving an open door to
sanction relief
for Russia, the congressmen and
leaders there
see an opportunity to try and
close that door
tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, now on
a domestic
issue question, health care
reform, there
was an audiotape of some of the
Republican
congressional retreat in
Philadelphia this
week, and it leaked. Some
interesting material
on there. What do we learn from
that?
LISA DESJARDINS: This is just
unprecedented.
These are private meetings where
members do
sort of let loose, if you will,
and say things
that they do not say in public.
And here The Washington Post and
others have
received an anonymous tape from
this. They
confirmed it through several
members who were
in the room. And in that tape,
it shows that
many members of the House
Republican Conference
are nervous about what's ahead.
They're nervous
about how exactly they thread
several needles,
including how do they make sure
that premiums
don't go up, how do they make
sure that no
one loses their health care
coverage, how
do they make sure that they
don't have any
political fallback from this?
And I did get a statement from
the House speaker's
office that these are
discussions that are
a normal part of legislation.
But from others
who didn't want to speak using
their names
because of this is behind closed
doors, they
said it's becoming clear there's
no silver
bullet for the House Republicans
and that
this is going to be messy
process with some
very tough votes ahead for
Republicans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fascinating.
And just quickly, Lisa, this has
been a very
busy week. And you have already
got a sense
of what's coming up next week.
LISA DESJARDINS: Oh, get ready.
Next week, we have got all of
these confirmation
fights already ongoing, plus a
Supreme Court
nominee, we expect, plus the
beginnings of
committee debate over how to
repeal Obamacare,
so buckle up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We are buckling
up. Lisa Desjardins
at the White House, thank you.
ANTONIO MORA: In the day's other
news, the
National Park Service confirms
President Trump
ordered it to put out more
photos of his inauguration
crowd. That came in a phone call
to the agency's
acting head on Saturday. The
Washington Post
reports the president was angry
over images
that showed his crowd was
dwarfed by President
Obama's in 2009.
A White House spokesman
responded today, saying,
President Trump is someone who
takes action
and gets things done.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The new American
ambassador
to the United Nations, Nikki
Haley, is starting
her tenure with a warning. This
was Nikki
Haley's first day on the job at
the U.N.,
and she pledged support for U.S.
allies. But
the former South Carolina
governor also made
it known -- quote -- "For those
that don't
have our back, we're taking
names."
ANTONIO MORA: Seventy-two years
ago today,
Soviet troops liberated the Nazi
death camp
at Auschwitz, Poland.
Today, elderly survivors
gathered there to
mark the event on International
Holocaust
Remembrance Day. Along with the
Polish prime
minister, they laid candles at a
monument
for more than six million Jews
murdered by
the Nazis, including more than
one million
at Auschwitz.
BOGDAN BARTNIKOWSKI, Auschwitz
Survivor (through
translator): I don't feel like a
guest of
honor here. I always feel either
like a former
prisoner or a prisoner, because
when I walk
down this corridor, the one we
just entered
through, I still walk naked,
just like then,
because this is in my memory,
and not just
mine. I speak with other
survivors. We are
all branded for life with these
horrible experiences.
ANTONIO MORA: At the United
Nations today,
Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres warned
that anti-Semitism and
anti-Muslim hatred
are on the rise. He said
irrationality and
intolerance are back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S.
economy's growth in
2016 was the weakest in five
years. The Commerce
Department reports the rate of
expansion was
just 1.6 percent from the year
before. President
Trump has set a goal of doubling
the growth
rate to 4 percent a year through
tax cuts,
public works spending and
deregulation.
ANTONIO MORA: And Wall Street
finished this
Friday with a lackluster
showing, thanks in
part to the disappointing data
on growth.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost seven
points to close at 20093. The
Nasdaq rose
five points, and the S&P 500
slipped two.
For the week, the Dow and the
S&P rose 1 percent
or more. The Nasdaq was up
nearly 2 percent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
more on the president's order to
limit the
number of refugees coming to the
U.S.; the
first visit of Britain's prime
minister to
the White House; tens of
thousands march against
abortion with the vice
president's support;
and much more.
ANTONIO MORA: President Trump's
executive
order to limit refugees,
immigrants and visitors
to the United States aims to
reduce the possibility
of terrorist attacks here at
home. But will
it be effective?
We get two views. Daniel
Benjamin was ambassador-at-large
and coordinator for
counterterrorism at the
State Department during the
Obama administration.
He's now at Dartmouth College.
And Reuel Marc
Gerecht is a former CIA case
officer. He's
now a senior fellow with the
Foundation for
the Defense of Democracies.
It is very good to have you both
with us.
Dan, I want to start with you.
We believe the order calls for
the suspension
of entry to the U.S. of people
from seven
mostly Muslim countries. Do you
think that
will fulfill the order's intent
of protecting
Americans from terrorism?
DANIEL BENJAMIN, Former State
Department Coordinator
for Counterterrorism: No, I
don't think it
will do anything to make us
safer.
Since 9/11, there hasn't been a
single case
of a terrorist coming in from
outside the
country to carry out an attack.
And so it's
really hard to believe that this
executive
order is going to improve on the
very, very
good job that our immigration
system does
right now.
That system has been improved
dramatically
since 9/11. Applicants for visas
or to immigrate
here are screened many times
against many
databases with all kinds of
information that
might tell us something about
them, and I
don't think that this is going
to in any way
help. And, if anything, it will
send the wrong
signal and might undermine our
security by
further disturbing Muslim
communities here
at home about their feeling and
increase their
feeling of isolation and
embattlement.
ANTONIO MORA: To Dan's point,
most of terrorism
in the United States has been
homegrown. But,
of course, 9/11 was carried out
by people
from foreign countries. Do you
think going
after these seven countries
makes much sense?
REUEL MARC GERECHT, Senior
Fellow, Foundation
for the Defense of Democracies:
Well, we have
to wait to see the details of
it, but I'm
skeptical.
I think they need to know what
the Bush and
the Obama administrations have
done wrong.
And, as Dan said, I think the
process has
gotten pretty rigorous. Now, if
they can find
some area of improvement, go
ahead and show
us, but I...
ANTONIO MORA: Well, they are
calling for tighter
visa screening around the world
and saying
that countries who don't help
will end up
being penalized and won't get
visas. That
would create a tremendous...
(CROSSTALK)
REUEL MARC GERECHT: Yes, but if
you want to
look, the area where at least
scares counterterrorist
officers the most has always
been European
Muslims coming to the United
States.
Now, they may end the visa
waiver program
for all Europeans, but I
guarantee you, I
-- I once upon a time did a lot
of visa interviews
and other interviews. And I am
skeptical how
this mechanically works, that
somehow the
officers are going to penetrate
into this
situation more than they have
already done,
that they're going to be somehow
more rigorous
than they have already been.
ANTONIO MORA: But, on the other
hand, Dan,
the female attacker in San
Bernardino had
come in and, very quickly, after
her name
was known, it was pretty obvious
that she
had extremist ties. So, can
tighter immigration
screening help?
DANIEL BENJAMIN: So, look, there
is always
room for innovation in
human-designed systems.
And one area that's of great
concern, but
that will be extremely expensive
to do a better
job on, is social media. So, you
are correct
that she is, in some ways, the
one outlier
in this period. But, you know,
we should improve
where we can, as long as it's
cost-effective.
But we should also keep in mind,
though, that
more than a third of the crimes,
terrorist-related
crimes that are being carried
out by Muslims
in this country are being
carried out by converts,
and that, really, the largest
amount of radicalization
is going on within our borders.
So, I think we need to spend a
lot more money
on, you know, increasing our
connectivity
with those communities, so that
we can give
them the tools to identify
people who are
radicalizing and give them
off-ramps, keep
them from going the distance and
taking to
violence.
ANTONIO MORA: But it has been
somewhat different
in Europe, where a lot of the
European terrorism
has been homegrown. You have got
Tunisians,
Algerians, Moroccans, Reuel.
So, is it just that maybe we're
a few steps
removed from that and we need to
start taking
action now to avoid seeing
what's happening
there?
REUEL MARC GERECHT: That's a
good question.
The Europeans are in a
completely different
situation, because they have had
giant refugee
waves, where there essentially
was no processing,
there was no security procedures
set up, no
interviews, essentially nothing.
They just
came over.
So, in that type of situation,
of course,
a group like the Islamic State
or al-Qaida
could implant people into those
waves and
use them. Now, the American
system is much
more laborious, much more
time-consuming.
There's a reason why there
hasn't been a sleeper
cell in any of the refugee
programs in the
United States, because it just
-- you're not
guaranteed.
Why would you deploy a young
holy warrior
into a system that could take
years and probably
he might not even get status?
ANTONIO MORA: Right.
And this order, we believe, also
calls for
the suspension of all refugees
from Syria
indefinitely and for a
suspension of refugees
from any country for the next
four months.
Given what Reuel just said, Dan,
do you agree?
Is there any point to that?
DANIEL BENJAMIN: No, actually, I
find this
deeply disturbing.
It's Holocaust Remembrance Day.
What's going
on in Syria is the worst
humanitarian crisis
since World War II. And we are
punishing those
who are suffering most in this
circumstance,
in this condition.
We vet refugees from Syria for a
period of
18 to 24 months before they're
allowed to
come to the United States. And,
you know,
if you will permit me, I think
we know more
about them by the time they get
here than
we know about the president's
finances.
(LAUGHTER)
DANIEL BENJAMIN: And, you know,
it's really
a remarkable fact that we are
punishing these
people. We should be taking in
more of them.
There hasn't been a single case
of terrorist
activity on the part of a Syrian
refugee.
(CROSSTALK)
ANTONIO MORA: And, of course,
one of the criticisms
of all this is that this smacks
of anti-Muslim
bigotry. And there is a
provision in what
we believe will be the order
that says that,
once the refugee suspension is
lifted, that
priority will be given to people
who are members
of religious minorities in
countries who are
persecuted in those countries.
That does seem to be something
that is aimed
at protecting Christians.
REUEL MARC GERECHT: I suspect
that's the intent.
I mean, I don't have a problem
with the United
States giving, you know, an open
door to people
who are being persecuted abroad.
And if that
happens to be Christians, then,
fine, let
the Christians come in. I really
don't have
a problem with that.
You know, I do think they need
to think this
through a bit more, and I think
they also
need to pay particular attention
to what they
do with the Europeans, because
the real truth
is, we don't talk about it. When
it comes
to counterterrorism, the
Europeans are not
freeloaders, all right?
The British and the French in
particular are
the vanguard of America's
protection. It is
their security services, which
are now overwhelmed
by the refugee issues, that have
done the
lion's share of protecting U.S.
shores.
So, whatever we do, we should
coordinate that
pretty closely with the
Europeans and we should
try not to do things that are
going to make
the Europeans really upset.
ANTONIO MORA: All right, we will
see how this
plays out.
Reuel Marc Gerecht and Daniel
Benjamin, very
good to have both your insights.
Thanks.
REUEL MARC GERECHT: Hi, Dan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In contrast to
the ban on refugees,
the White House opened its doors
today to
the United States' most trusted
ally.
As Margaret Warner reports, in
the face of
uncharted waters, there was an
appreciation
of a shared history.
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: It is a great honor to
have Winston
Churchill back.
MARGARET WARNER: President Trump
had a warm
Oval Office welcome for Prime
Minister May,
as the two posed beside a bust
of Britain's
greatest wartime leader.
And both are now trying to steer
their countries
in new directions amid great
uncertainty.
May is charting Britain's
withdrawal from
the European Union after the
public voted
for Brexit, which triggered her
predecessor
David Cameron's resignation. May
didn't support
leaving the E.U. either, but
she's now pledged
to see it through, insisting it
will be a
clean break.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: Brexit
means Brexit, and we're going to
make a success
of it.
MARGARET WARNER: Last April in
London, then-President
Obama warned a vote to leave the
E.U. would
jeopardize a future U.S.-U.K.
trade agreement.
BARACK OBAMA, Former President
of the United
States: Because our focus is in
negotiating
with a big bloc, the European
Union, to get
a trade agreement done. And the
U.K. is going
to be in the back of the queue.
MARGARET WARNER: Mr. Trump,
however, was a
vocal Brexit supporter.
DONALD TRUMP: People want to
take their country
back.
MARGARET WARNER: And Nigel
Farage, the man
who led the Brexit movement,
campaigned with
Mr. Trump, and visited him in
New York just
days after his election.
Atop May's agenda now is to get
President
Trump to commit to negotiate a
bilateral trade
deal as soon as Britain leaves
the E.U. Yet,
President Trump vows to put
America first,
and has already issued some
protectionist
orders, like insisting new oil
pipelines be
built with American steel.
Britain's ambassador to the
U.S., Sir Kim
Darroch, said what May needs now
is a pledge
to negotiate a deal, not the
details.
SIR KIM DARROCH, U.S. Ambassador
to the United
States: As we leave the E.U., we
intend to
go global to have a global
series of trading
relationships. I think it's
reassuring to
the British public to know that
the door over
here is open to doing a deal
quickly.
MARGARET WARNER: Julian Borger,
The Guardian's
world affairs editor, said
negotiating an
exit from the E.U. won't be
easy.
JULIAN BORGER, The Guardian: It
is going to
be economically and politically
very costly
to do. Trump's arrival is really
a political
lifeline for her. She can say,
we are now
global Britain. We look beyond
Europe. We
have -- there's a whole world
out there that's
willing to buy our stuff and
stand with us.
And U.S. is exhibit A, our
closest ally, special
relationship. These sort of
ideas and phrases
really resonate in the U.K.
MARGARET WARNER: Former Deputy
Assistant Secretary
of State Heather Conley said Mr.
Trump had
a lot at stake in this visit as
well.
HEATHER CONLEY, Director, Europe
Program,
Center for Strategic and
International Studies:
President Trump needs a
successful meeting
with his first foreign leader.
This is important.
He needs to assume and be very
presidential.
He needs a command of the brief.
He needs
to make sure that he represents
the United
States in a very clear fashion
with details
and with substance.
MARGARET WARNER: Ever since
World War II,
both countries have hailed their
-- quote
-- "special relationship."
In the 1980s, Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher
and President Ronald Reagan
stood firm against
the Soviet Union. In the 2000s,
Prime Minister
Tony Blair joined President
George W. Bush's
Iraq invasion, at great
political cost to
Blair.
Today, the prime minister wanted
to persuade
Mr. Trump to maintain that
security partnership,
standing firm against Russian
adventurism
in Ukraine, and maintaining U.S.
support for
NATO, on which he's sent mixed
signals.
Days before taking office, Mr.
Trump told
The Times of London and the
German newspaper
Bild that NATO was obsolete
because it wasn't
taking care of terror. He
complained that
other members aren't paying
their fair share,
"very unfair to the United
States." Then he
added, "With that being said,
NATO is very
important to me."
There are other differences too.
May, who
criticized candidate Trump's
proposals to
ban Muslim immigrants and his
crude comments
about women, is under pressure
at home to
make those differences clear
here. She told
a BBC interviewer last weekend:
THERESA MAY: Some of the
comments that Donald
Trump has made in relation to
women are unacceptable.
Whenever there is something that
I find unacceptable,
I won't be afraid to say that to
Donald Trump.
MARGARET WARNER: Another
friction point, Mr.
Trump's suggestion that the U.S.
should reinstate
torture and other harsh
interrogation techniques.
She responded Wednesday in
Parliament.
THERESA MAY: We do not sanction
torture. We
do not get involved with that,
and that will
continue to be our position.
MARGARET WARNER: Today, their
differences
on torture and maintaining
sanctions on Russia
were front and center when they
met reporters.
On other matters, the president
affirmed the
two nations' close partnership.
DONALD TRUMP: We have one of the
great bonds.
We pledge our lasting support to
this most
special relationship.
MARGARET WARNER: But he didn't
say a word
about a bilateral trade
agreement, nor about
NATO. That left it up to the
prime minister
to assert that they'd had a
meeting of the
minds on both.
On trade:
THERESA MAY: We are discussing
how we can
establish a trade negotiation
agreement, take
forward immediate high-level
talks, lay the
groundwork for U.K.-U.S. trade
agreement.
MARGARET WARNER: And on NATO,
after saying
London would urge other members
to hike their
defense spending, she added:
THERESA MAY: We have reaffirmed
our unshakeable
commitment to this alliance. Mr.
President,
I think you said, confirmed that
you're 100
percent behind NATO.
MARGARET WARNER: He didn't
respond on NATO.
And on the prospects for a trade
deal, he
said only:
DONALD TRUMP: My position on
trade has been
solid for many, many years,
since I was a
very young person talking about
how we were
getting ripped off by the rest
of the world.
But we will be talking to your
folks about
Brexit.
MARGARET WARNER: May will have
to walk a fine
line forging a close
relationship with Mr.
Trump. Thousands of protesters
massed in London
Saturday in opposition to him.
Again, Julian Borger:
JULIAN BORGER: He's seen as
volatile, unpredictable.
Some of his remarks are seen as
racist. He
seems as a dangerous player on
the international
stage, and also suspected
because of his complete
refusal to say anything negative
about Vladimir
Putin or Moscow, who are both
viewed deeply
unfavorably in the U.K.
MARGARET WARNER: So there's much
work ahead
for this special relationship to
blossom anew.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
ANTONIO MORA: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields
and David Brooks analyze the
week's news;
and an Asian-American comedian
shares his
experience with everyday racism.
But first: Less than a week
after Saturday's
massive Women's March on
Washington, demonstrators
again gathered in the nation's
capital today.
Their message was to call for an
end to legal
abortion.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: This was the 44th
March For
Life, but it held special
significance for
tens of thousands of
anti-abortion activists,
with the coming of a Republican
president
and Congress.
Many arrived in groups from
churches and schools
after long bus rides. President
Trump began
their day with a tweet, saying:
"To all of
you marching, you have my full
support."
And at a rally before the march,
a sitting
vice president addressed the
annual gathering
for the first time.
MIKE PENCE (R), Vice President:
Because of
all of you and the many
thousands who stand
with us in marches like this all
across the
nation, life is winning again in
America.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a cold and
windy morning
here on the National Mall, but
people are
out in numbers. And they speak
to us of a
new optimism and new energy
around this issue
that has galvanized them for so
long. People
feel they're on the very cusp of
change.
Donna Katzung of Washington,
Missouri, has
made the trip to Washington,
D.C., for the
last eight years.
DONNA KATZUNG, Protester: This
year, with
President Trump and Vice
President Pence,
you know, there's a feeling that
maybe we're
going to get somewhere, that
somebody is hearing
us, that our voice is out there
and being
heard.
JEFFREY BROWN: The president has
already signaled
he's listening. On Monday, he
signed an executive
order reinstating the so-called
Mexico City
policy, which bars federal funds
to international
aid organizations that offer
abortions or
abortion advocacy.
He's also said he will soon
announce his Supreme
Court nominee to replace the
late Justice
Antonin Scalia, one with similar
views on
abortion. Many here see that as
a move toward
overturning Roe v. Wade, the
court's 1973
decision that legalized
abortion.
JEFFREY ZACHA, Protester: We
would be happy
with anything. Anything means
we're moving
in the right direction. But, I
mean, a complete
repeal would be our ultimate
goal. I have
been hoping for that for --
nothing against
President Trump, but that's one
of the main
reasons I voted for him.
JEFFREY BROWN: The March For
Life followed
on the heels of last Saturday's
Women's March
on Washington, protesting the
new president.
City officials said it drew more
than half-a-million
people here, many more around
the globe.
Some women today, like Abbey
Bongiorno of
Green Bay, Wisconsin, said
they'd felt excluded.
ABBEY BONGIORNO, Protester: The
pro-lifers
weren't really invited to that.
As a woman,
it was really interesting that I
wasn't really
allowed to march with fellow
women because
I believe that it's wrong to
have abortions
in the United States.
JEFFREY BROWN: But they did
march today. Officials
offered no immediate estimate of
the crowd.
Abortion rights supporters were
also out,
in far smaller numbers, in a
counterprotest.
A recent poll by the Pew
Research Center found
57 percent of the public
supports legal abortion
in all or most cases, as high as
it's been
in two decades.
And now we look at today's march
and beyond
with Marjorie Dannenfelser.
She's president
of the Susan B. Anthony List, a
national anti-abortion
group.
Welcome to you.
To what extent do you see the
election as
having changed the politics of
abortion? What
is possible now?
MARJORIE DANNENFELSER,
President, Susan B.
Anthony List: It's revolution as
the politics
of abortion.
We have control of the House and
the Senate.
And we have strong commitments
from the administration
to make real changes for the
first time in
decades. So, we're very well
positioned to
enact some change.
JEFFREY BROWN: The march today
is an annual
event. It was long in the
planning, but did
you come to see it as a kind of
response to
last weak's Women's March?
MARJORIE DANNENFELSER: Well, I
see a contrast,
but it's not a response.
It happens every single year,
and it has for
44 years, which shows the
staying power and
the conviction of this group of
people. There
are a lot of differences between
those two.
There is a clear mandate for
this one.
The -- last week's march was an
amorphous
kind of hodgepodge of issues.
You could even
be marching for something you
didn't necessarily
agree with because you weren't
even sure last
week. I think that happened to a
lot of women
in that march.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, as we said,
polls continue
to show broad support for
abortion rights.
As your movement gains more in
the political
arena, why does it continue to
lag in the
larger culture?
MARJORIE DANNENFELSER: It
doesn't lag in the
larger culture, especially the
agenda that
we have set forward that Trump
is behind that
the Congress is poised to pass
that is a 20-week
ban, no abortions in this nation
after 20
weeks. That's wildly popular.
There is no limit currently.
Also, a redirect
of Planned Parenthood funding to
organizations
that address the whole health of
women and
don't provide abortions. These
are very common
ground issues, and no taxpayer
funding of
abortion at all.
These are 60 percent, 70 percent
issues, and
that is actually what's on the
agenda of this
president, and in the voice of
that one marcher
that you interviewed, it will be
tremendous
progress. Any change in the
pro-life direction
will mean that there is
progress, and it will
come far closer to the will of
the people,
whereas right now they have got
nothing.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, we do --
the kinds of
things you're talking about are
in state legislatures,
but still the larger polls, to
come back to
my question about the larger
culture, you
don't see too much of a shift.
MARJORIE DANNENFELSER: There is
an enormous
shift.
When you ask the question, do
you like pro-choice
or pro-life, you generally get
about an even
split, but generally people are
comfortable
with the term pro-choice. When
you start to
break down what they mean by
that, they are
definitely for late-term bans.
And, no, this is definitely a
federal bill
that has been voted on by House
and Senate
last session and will be voted
on again. All
the issues I mention are federal
priorities,
and they have the tremendous
backing of the
American people, especially
women.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, this
goes to my
next question, though, because a
lot of the
success in recent years has been
at the state
level. Does the focus now shift
to more federal
types actions of the kind you
were just talking
about?
MARJORIE DANNENFELSER: It's
both/and.
The state level will continue
because we're
even stronger on the state
level, which speaks
for the pro-life movement. And
then now, because
we have the strength on the
federal level,
we can finally stand for a
nation for a reasonable
abortion policy, going from one
there are
no restrictions whatsoever to
reasonable restrictions
that match up to public policy,
and again
especially women's views on
this.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, next week,
as we know,
Donald Trump has said he will
nominate a new
Supreme Court justice. Do you
see the end
of Roe v. Wade in this and what
will finally
bring it? When might it occur?
MARJORIE DANNENFELSER: I doubt
very much there
will be a day that someone
proclaims that
there is an end to Roe vs. Wade.
It was poorly
decided in conjunction with Doe
vs. Bolton.
Liberal jurists say that this
was a legislative
action, more than it was a
juridical action.
So, what I think we will see is
an erosion.
When a 20-week ban passes on the
federal level,
that will contradict some of the
premises
of Roe v. Wade.
And there will be an adjustment.
I would be
all for overturning it in a day.
I think it's
more likely that we will see
modest proposals
that are enacted into the law
and that slowly
the will of the people will be
enacted into
the law as well.
JEFFREY BROWN: Many people are
still parsing
the recent election and the
outcome. And I
have to ask you, even
personally, I saw a
letter from January 2016 in
which a number
of anti-abortion leaders wrote a
letter saying
anybody but Donald Trump.
And there was a quote in there
that said,
"As women, we are disgusted by
Mr. Trump's
treatment of individuals, women
in particular."
MARJORIE DANNENFELSER: Yes. I
was the author
of that letter. I was the author
of that letter.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: I know. That's
why I'm asking
you.
MARJORIE DANNENFELSER: I know.
I'm -- that's
why I'm saying, good question.
And, yes, I was the author of
that letter.
He was our last choice because
of the reasons
that were stated in that letter.
He was our
last choice, and then until he
was our first
choice. And why was he our first
choice?
He was, because we are comparing
two people
with fatal character flaws, in
our opinion,
at that point. We thought that
we weren't
sure before that who we could
trust. But there
was no question that, when
compared to Hillary
Clinton, her treatment of the
women that went
through her husband's life, and
Trump and
how -- and the concerns that we
had about
the outrageous things that he
said, we were
voting on policy in the end.
And policy must rule the day,
when you have
a choice like that, and, for us,
he was far
greater committed pro-life and
is turning
out to be the far better choice
because he
is following through on the
commitments and
become the person that we hoped
that he would
be.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Excuse me.
I just wanted to ask you one
more question,
briefly, if you could.
MARJORIE DANNENFELSER: Sure.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just thinking
again about the
causes and the factors behind
the election,
how much do you think abortion
was a factor
in the end in Donald Trump's
victory?
MARJORIE DANNENFELSER: It was
the biggest
factor in any election. In any
election, abortion
was a major factor. He believes
that. We know
that. We saw the numbers of
voters that we
brought to the polls in
battleground states.
It was the number one Googled
item the day
before the election. It was on
their minds.
And we brought those votes to
the battleground
states for a win. And he knows
that, and so
does Mike Pence.
JEFFREY BROWN: Marjorie
Dannenfelser, thank
you very much.
MARJORIE DANNENFELSER: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: From executive
actions to early
morning tweets, the first week
of the Trump
administration has been marked
by a flurry
of twists and turns.
To help make sense of it all,
the analysis
of Shields and Brooks. That's
syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York Times
columnist
David Brooks.
And welcome to both of you.
And I guess you could say, Mark,
from Mexico
to Russia, from oil pipelines to
health care,
it has not been a quiet first
week. How's
it gone?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, if you're a
Trump supporter,
it's gone terrific.
He's done what he said he was
going to do.
He was -- honored his campaign
commitments
on the wall, on keeping the
borders secure,
or safe, or limited, and
stopping immigration
as much as possible, and
building the pipeline
and going ahead. I mean, so, in
that sense,
he didn't lose any support among
his supporters.
Among his critics, I think whose
doubts were
very much, in large part not
simply ideological,
but about the temperament of
Donald Trump,
it's reinforced those doubts,
his performance,
especially the smallness of his
preoccupation
about the size of the crowd,
which he keeps
returning to in a rather bizarre
fashion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
this first week,
David?
DAVID BROOKS: We were here a
week ago together,
and it feels like a century.
And I wonder, over the course of
his presidency,
can he keep up this pace of news
and busyness
and conflict without just
exhausting everybody?
And I will say, among
businesspeople I have
spoken to, among political class
and among
the Republicans on the Hill,
just a great
sense of being unnerved,
unnerved at the instability.
Partly, he's done what he said,
as Mark said.
He's undermined the post-war
international
order pretty quickly. Tearing
down TPP was
a bill that I think economists
say would have
produced hundreds of millions --
billions
of dollars of earnings every
year for Americans.
Picking a fight with our second
biggest export
market, very unnerving. I don't
see the -- but
then I think the two other
things I would
say is, the general sense of
chaos and incompetence
on how you do it.
OK, you want to pick a fight
with Mexico.
Do you have to do it by tweet?
Do you have
put forward a proposal that
would have Americans
paying for the wall, and then
sort of withdraw
it, and then sort of not
withdraw it, do in
a way maximally designed to
polarize Mexican
opinion against the United
States?
And then the final thing is, I
wonder, I'm
left wondering, how much of this
is real?
OK, he signs a series of papers
that Steve
Bannon and others wrote for him,
but who is
going to implement it? Does it
make any sense?
We saw that with the Syrian ban
in the discussion
earlier in the program.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
DAVID BROOKS: How much of it is
the government
just going to let him sign
papers and then
it just goes along their merry
way?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I want to ask
you both
about that.
But I think, Mark, coming back
to something
you -- well, both of you have
referred to
this. Should everyone who voted
for him and
who watched him for months have
really expected
what we have seen this week?
He's -- it's
the full Donald Trump coming
forward, isn't
it?
MARK SHIELDS: No question.
I mean, you know, we have talked
about the
disenchantment, the alienation
of American
voters because voters --
Republicans -- how
long have Republicans promised a
balance budget?
How long have Republicans
pretended they care
deeply about budget deficits, or
Democrats
on their issues about the poor,
about really
doing something about those in
poverty and
income inequality?
And then they get elected, and,
no, you can't
do it, you can't do it.
I mean, whatever else, I mean,
he has certainly
been against the grain on that.
But I don't
think the temperamental -- the
divide on this
week, Judy, I think, is those
who look at
Donald Trump and see somebody
who goes to
the CIA and...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last Saturday.
MARK SHIELDS: ... and lashes out
at the press
and complains about the coverage
of the size.
Here he is, going to the Wall of
Heroes, sends
out his press secretary for his
debut looking
like a hostage tape complaining
about the
-- about press coverage of this,
insisting
it's the biggest crowd ever.
Nobody has ever measured crowds,
except Barack
Obama, because it was a historic
turnout.
But the biggest crowd before
that was Lyndon
Johnson. Nobody knows that.
Donald Trump all
of a sudden is preoccupied by
it.
And there's one thing that
happened this week,
I think, that, if I were in the
White House,
I would be deeply concerned
about. And that
was the Dallas Stars hockey
team, the National
Hockey League team, plays in the
American
Airlines Center in Dallas that
has a capacity
crowd of 18,562.
They had a capacity crowd last
Saturday night
right after Spicer, right after
the CIA. And
they put up on their JumboTron,
on the big
screen, attendance, 1.5 million.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: And the whole
place erupted
in laughter.
And that's -- when you become a
punchline
30 hours into your presidency in
Dallas among
hockey fans, that portends a
problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does he run a
real danger,
David, of that happening? Or are
people saying,
OK, let's give him -- it's only
the first
week, let's see what happens?
DAVID BROOKS: No. No. People are
in more panic
mode than before.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: He's just picked
fight after
fight. This was an example.
And there are sort of two
theories of he tells
things that are false all the
time. Is it
because he's sort of an
Orwellian figure,
an authoritarian figure who is
twisting words
in an Orwellian manner, "1984,"
to exercise
power and control people's
minds, or is he
a 5-year-old who has an ego that
needs to
be fed, and the universe has to
warp around
his ego needs so he can feel
good about himself,
and everybody has to produce
photos to make
the monarch feel like he's made
of gold?
MARK SHIELDS: Which do you vote
on?
DAVID BROOKS: I vote on the
5-year-old kid.
MARK SHIELDS: King George III?
DAVID BROOKS: The madness of
King George III.
And so I think, when we see that
distortion,
it's because he just needs the
ego fed all
the time.
And I don't if anybody saw the
-- after the
CIA, he gave an ABC interview
where he talked
about the standing ovation...
JUDY WOODRUFF: I watched it.
DAVID BROOKS: ... at the CIA,
the longest
ever...
MARK SHIELDS: Peyton Manning.
DAVID BROOKS: ... since Peyton
Manning.
Well, first of all, the
employees couldn't
sit down because he didn't tell
them to sit
down. So, they're standing. Of
course it's
a standing ovation. They can't
sit down.
But then the way he went on and
on, that was
a home run, and, I mean, it's --
it's weird.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which leads,
Mark, back to,
I think again, what both of you
were talking
about, and that's this question
of facts or
whether they call them alternate
facts.
Are we going to continue to
debate this kind
of thing for the duration of the
first year
or the rest of his presidency?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, we are, Judy.
I will tell you why, because
Steve Bannon,
the president's senior
counselor, chief strategist,
said something this week that
was absolutely
true. He said that there is no
opposition
party.
The Democrats lost 958
legislative seats during
Barack Obama's eight years. The
Democrats
went into the election of 2016
holding control
of seven states where they have
got the governorship
and both houses of the
legislature.
Today, as we sit here,
Connecticut, Rhode
Island, Oregon, California, and
Hawaii are
the five states that have
Democratic governors
and Democratic legislatures.
It's 2,500 miles
from Hartford to Sacramento, and
there's not
a single Democratic-controlled
state in between
that.
So, the opposition really is --
Marty Baron,
the editor of The Washington
Post, is the
leader of the opposition, or
David's paper,
or mainstream media, because
they're the ones
that have to call them account.
There are
214 committees and subcommittees
on the Hill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, he called
-- Steve Bannon
called the press the opposition
party, but
he meant it, I think, as a...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Well, he meant it,
but I think
he -- whether he meant it or
not, he spoke
the truth, because
accountability and facts
are going to be maintained and
insisted upon.
It's only going to come that
way.
The Democrats are -- on the Hill
are powerless.
They couldn't pass salt if they
asked for
it. They couldn't. I'm sorry.
They couldn't
pass the sugar. That's how weak
they are.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it that bad?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I do think
there is another
opposition more effective right
now, or more
important, which is people who
work in government,
some of the civil servants.
They have to -- if we're going
to impose a
visa on European countries, they
have got
to process it. And, believe me,
civil servants
have many ways to not do
something. And it's
easier for them not to do it.
The second is Congress, and not
only the Democrats,
but -- that's important, but
also the Republicans
in Congress. The Republicans in
Congress,
A, they believe in Ronald
Reagan's Republican
Party, not Donald Trump
Republican Party or
Steve Bannon's Republican Party.
Second, they have made this
Faustian bargain
with the guy. They think, we're
going to tolerate
him, and -- but just as long as
he signs our
legislation. And if we can get
some health
care that we like or a tax
reform that we
like, all that chaos is worth
it.
But the chaos may turn out to be
too high
a price to pay. And so now we
get in a big
fight with Mexico, and some
members of Congress
are very upset that we have
upset this, needlessly
started a trade war, which could
go totally
out of control.
And some of them would love to
go down to
Mexico and say, hey, he doesn't
speak for
us. And they are not going to do
it now because
they're pausing to see what
happens, but six,
eight months, a year, they could
decide, this
is too much for our country, we
have to go
down, and we would go to Mexico
or whoever
the next 18 fights he picks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David makes a
point, Mark.
You both talk about how much of
what Donald
Trump is saying is going to
become reality.
His own party is going to have a
lot to say
about how much of it becomes
reality.
MARK SHIELDS: They are.
And David is a very cheerful
optimist on the
subject of Republican backbone.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: I have seen --
this man has
taken over the Republican Party.
He's transformed
the Republican Party.
It is not -- Donald Trump is an
independent
presidential candidate who ran
on the Republican
label. He really did. He took it
over. He
transformed it into his image,
in his likeness.
He will toss a deferential nod
once in a while.
But it's Trump's agenda. It
isn't Paul Ryan's
agenda. It isn't Mitch
McConnell's. They can
stop him. I mean, as they have
already stood
up, McConnell has, on sanctions
to Russia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank God for Jim
Mattis. I
don't mean to sound like a
broken record.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On torture.
MARK SHIELDS: The now secretary
of defense
on torture, Trump has at least
deferred to
him, while expressing for the
first time ever
an American president's support,
the full-throated
support of torture, endorsement
of torture.
At least Cheney, Dick Cheney,
the vice president,
used the euphemism of enhanced
interrogation
for torture, which has been
outlawed, which
is illegal, which is immoral,
which is diplomatically
disastrous and militarily
counterproductive
and hurtful.
So, I'm still waiting. Thank God
for John
McCain, quite frankly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, David, what
makes you
think that Republicans are going
to have,
as Mark said, the backbone to
stand up to
him?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, A, because I
hear rumblings
of it. I hope rumblings lead to
backbone.
But, second, if present is
prologue, then
Trump is this whirling dervish
of chaos. He
picked a fight with Mexico.
Germany is not
far behind. He will pick a fight
with them.
He will pick a fight with China,
which would
be truly cataclysmic.
Vietnam has been severely hurt
by what he
did this week on TPP. So just a
series of
big fights just in the
international arena.
And, as I mentioned a couple
weeks ago, the
president makes a lot of
decisions about use
of armed force.
And some of those are going to
go -- for him
to make decisions on
questionable information
is going to happen. He's going
to have to
make those decisions. And it
will just feel
like the whole American project,
I believe,
is weirdly under threat.
Now, it could be that he just
does this in
the realm of media, and he lives
up there,
and Steve Bannon runs policy
down here. And
that would just have a
Berlusconi destabilizing
effect on our culture, and have
no practical
effect.
But I do think he is a
fundamentally unstabilizing
force and that the people who
swore to uphold
the Constitution are going to
have to take
some measures at some point.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Mark, in
just the minute
left, he still has the support
-- the polls
support he still has the support
of the people
who voted for him; 80 percent of
the Republicans
say he's doing a great job.
MARK SHIELDS: Well, Judy, this
is the honeymoon.
The troubles that he's inflicted
this week
and counting were totally
unforced errors
upon himself. So, this really is
a time. Americans
want the country to do well.
They want the
president to do well.
We just had -- broke the
20,000-point barrier,
and he stepped all over the
story. I mean,
if you were counseling the
president and you're
there when the Dow Jones breaks
20,000, you
go to, gee, I had nothing to do
with it, but
I'm loving that the American
people express
confidence and optimism in our
future.
Instead, he's doing something
with David Muir
complaining about the coverage
and telling
everybody to watch FOX News. So,
it's all
-- he's as high now with no
problems. They
haven't had a crisis yet.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, this is the
happiest week
for the presidency.
If Mr. Rogers is having a week,
this should
be his Mr. Rogers week, and it
wasn't exactly
Mr. Rogers.
Had to get that PBS reference
in.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: I liked the PBS
reference.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I like both
of you.
David Brooks, Mark Shields,
thank you both.
DAVID BROOKS: It's Barney.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Next week, an
exclusive conversation
coming up. I sit down with Vice
President
Mike Pence at the White House.
That is on Tuesday, January 31,
right here
on the "PBS NewsHour."
ANTONIO MORA: Finally tonight, a
look at the
subtle ways our society often
equates being
white with what's normal.
It comes from Peter Kim, who was
a member
of Chicago's famed Second City
comedy troupe.
It is the latest edition of
IMHO, In My Humble
Opinion.
PETER KIM, Comedian: When you
hear the phrase
white supremacy, what picture
comes to your
mind? Maybe it's Adolf Hitler
screaming into
a microphone. Maybe it's
white-hooded figures
marching around a burning cross.
For me, it's a lot less dramatic
and a lot
more commonplace. So, if I may,
I would like
to offer an updated definition
of white supremacy.
It's the idea that white is the
ideal, and
we are all consciously and
subconsciously
working to achieve whiteness.
For example, I'm an actor. And,
once, I was
sitting in the waiting room of a
casting agency
with a fellow actor who happened
to be white.
And I was telling him how I keep
getting called
in for roles looking for all
ethnicities,
but are clearly written for a
white man, like
characters named Vincent
Daniels.
And he says to me, "Well, Peter,
you're almost
white."
OK, let that sink in for a
second. If you
haven't flinched yet, you should
take a deep
look inside of yourself.
Me, an Asian-American, being
almost white?
Meaning what? That I'm not black
or Latino
or any skin complexion darker
than white?
In saying so, he's assuming that
white people
are the default race in this
country, that
I am almost normal.
And this isn't some ignorant
racist. This
is a liberal creative person
living in Chicago.
You see, this happens to me all
the time,
even in places I never thought
would exist.
See, I'm a Korean man who's also
gay. And
when I finally came out and
downloaded the
dating app Grindr -- spoiler
alert, ain't
nobody dating on Grindr -- I was
overwhelmed
by profiles saying no fems, no
fats, no Asians.
And I would say to myself, well,
that can't
be me, because, according to my
mom, I'm not
fat, I'm husky.
I have been lucky enough to
travel and perform
all around this country. And
when I get asked
the question where are you from,
and I respond,
oh, New York, most of the time,
well-meaning
white people get upset and ask,
you know what
I mean. Where are you from-from?
My boyfriend, who is from
Minnesota, whose
family has roots in Sweden,
never has to explain
where he's from-from.
So, my definition of white
supremacy is embedded
in the fabric of our everyday
lives. It's
in our schools, in our movies,
and on our
televisions.
Look, we all need car insurance,
but you will
likely never see someone like me
in ad for
something like that. It's clear
to the average
American that it's more
persuasive to be sold
insurance by a cheeky foreign
gecko than a
fabulous husky gaysian.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we're going
to remember
that one.
ANTONIO MORA: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: Does stigma stop some black
Americans
from identifying with the
Republican Party?
We visit the historically black
Howard University,
where a college GOP group was
recently reinstated
with the help of party
leadership.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tonight on "Washington Week": a
closer look
at President Trump's diplomatic
debut hosting
the British prime minister and
trying to mend
fences with Mexico over a border
wall. That's
later tonight on "Washington
Week."
ANTONIO MORA: On "PBS NewsHour"
Saturday:
Will changes to NAFTA help or
hurt American
businesses?
Here's a look:
NARRATOR: IBC Bank finances real
estate where
manufacturing warehouses handle
goods that
travel across the border.
DENNIS NIXON, CEO, International
Bank of Commerce:
Texas cannot survive without
Mexico. It's
our largest trading partner. It
would put
Texas in a recession immediately
and it would,
frankly, destroy Laredo, Texas.
We wouldn't
exist without trade.
NARRATOR: Congressman Will
Hurd's district
stretches from San Antonio for
more than 800
miles along the U.S.-Mexico
border. Hurd is
a Republican who supported
Trump, but he is
also concerned about how the
president may
roll back NAFTA.
REP. WILL HURD (R), Texas:
Uncertainty in
the business world is not
something that you
want, but I think people are
also -- they
recognize the opportunities that
we have,
and I think people are ready to
start having
negotiations on what does a
future NAFTA look
like.
ANTONIO MORA: That's tomorrow on
"PBS NewsHour
Weekend."
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Antonio Mora.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we thank you
for joining
us this week.
ANTONIO MORA: Been a pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.